slides/slides.md, before:

<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
# CMPT231
## Lecture 13: ch34
### Tractability, Semester Review

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## [1 Corinthians 1:18-21](http://www.esvbible.org/1%20Corinthians+1/) <span class="ref">(ESV)</span>
For the word of the **cross**
is **folly** to those who are perishing, <br/>
but to us who are being saved it is the **power** of God.

<span class="ref">19</span>
For it is written,
“I will destroy the **wisdom** of the wise, <br/>
and the **discernment** of the discerning I will thwart.”

<span class="ref">20</span>
Where is the one who is **wise**?
Where is the **scribe**? <br/>
Where is the **debater** of this age? <br/>
Has not God made **foolish** the wisdom of the world?
 
>>>
+ foolishness of God wiser than man's wisdom
+ boast in the Lord alone

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ **All-pairs** shortest path
  + *Johnson* (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ **Tractability**
  + Complexity **classes**: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + **Non-deterministic** verification: *NP*
  + **Reductions**
  + NP-**hard** and NP-**complete**
+ Semester **review**

---
## All-pairs shortest path
+ **Bellman-Ford** on each vertex: \`O(|V|^4)\`
+ Dyn prog by **path length**: \`O(|V|^3 log |V|)\`
+ **Floyd-Warshall** (by *subset* of *V*): \`O(|V|^3)\`
+ **Johnson** (*Dijkstra* on each vertex): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
  + **Reweight** edges for positive weights

---
## Johnson's reweighting
+ Johnson's trick: Add a **new** vertex *s*
  + Add **zero-weight** edges from *s* to all vertices:
    + *V'* = *V* &cup; {*s*},
    + *E'* = *E* &cup; {*(s,v)*: *v* &in; *V*}, and
      *w(s,v)* = 0 &forall; *v*
  + **Compute** *&delta;(s,v)* &forall; *v* (e.g., with Bellman-Ford)
  + **Reweight** edges using *h(v)* = *&delta;(s,v)*

![Johnson reweight, Fig-25-6(ab)](static/img/Fig-25-6ab.png)

---
## Johnson's reweighting
+ Why does this eliminate **negative weights**?
  + **Triangle inequality**: *&delta;(s,v)* &le; *&delta;(s,u)* + *w(u,v)*
  + Substitute **defn** of *h*: *h(v)* &le; *h(u)* + *w(u,v)*
  + Apply **reweighting**: *w'(u,v)* = *w(u,v)* + *h(u)* - *h(v)* &ge; 0

![Johnson reweight, Fig-25-6(ab)](static/img/Fig-25-6ab.png)

---
## Johnson all-pairs
```
def Johnson( G, w ):
  create G' = (V', E') with new vertex s
  BellmanFord( G', w, s )                   # find dlt[ s, v ]: O(VE)
    if returned FALSE, quit                 # net-neg cycle
  w'[ u, v ] = w[ u, v ] + dlt[ s, u ] - dlt( s, v ]
  for u in V:
    Dijkstra( G, w', u )                    # find dlt'[ u, v ]: O(VlgV + E)
    for v in V:
      d[ u, v ] = dlt'[ u, v ] - dlt[ s, u ] + dlt[ s, v ]
  return d
```

+ Innermost loop **converts** back to original weighting
+ **Complexity**: \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V||E|)\`

---
## All-pairs shortest path: summary
+ **Negative** edges allowed (but not net-negative *cycles*)
+ **Floyd-Warshall**: \`O(|V|^3)\`
  + Dyn prog by **subset** of vertices for intermediate nodes
+ **Johnson**: \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V||E|)\`
  + **Bellman Ford** from new source *s*
  + **Reweight**: *h(v)* = *&delta;(s,v)*
    and *w'(u,v)* = *w(u,v)* + *h(u)* - *h(v)*
  + Run **Dijkstra** from each vertex

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ All-pairs shortest path
  + Johnson (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ **Tractability**
  + **Complexity classes:** *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + Non-deterministic verification: *NP*
  + Reductions
  + NP-hard and NP-complete
+ Semester review

---
## Decision problems
+ Phrase problem as yes/no **decision**:
  + **Input**: a string *s* (e.g., encoded in binary)
  + **Problem**: a set of strings *X*
  + **Algorithm** *A* returns boolean: \`A(s) = true iff s in X\`
+ **Complexity** of *A* in terms of **length** *n* of *s*
+ e.g., given graph *(V, E, w)*, is there a **path** of weight &le; 4
  between nodes *u* and *v*?
  + **Input** *s* includes entire *graph* spec, "*4*", *u*, and *v*
  + Floyd-Warshall: \`O(|V|^3) = O(n^3)\`
+ e.g., given an integer *j*, is it **prime**?
  + Writing *j* out, **length** of input is \`n=log j\`
  + Lenstra-Pomerance [AKS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AKS_primality_test)
    algorithm (2011): \`O(n^6 log^k n)\`
    + roughly **polynomial** in length of input

---
## Turing machine model
+ General model of **computation**
+ Infinite **tape** using finite **symbol** set (plus *blank*)
+ Machine has a **head** that can *read*, *write*, and *move* left/right
+ Machine has a **state space** and **transitions**:
  + Instructions for when to **change** internal states
  + **Program** code (finite)

<div class="imgbox"><div>
![Alan Turing](static/img/alan-turing.jpg)
</div><div>
![Turing machine](static/img/turing-machine-2.png)
</div></div>

---
## Complexity classes
+ *P*: decision problems for which **polynomial-time** algorithms exist
  + **Most** of the algorithms in this course! \`O(n^c)\`
+ *EXP*: problems solvable in **exponential** time: \`O(2^(n^c))\`
+ *R*: problems solvable in **finite** time
  + R = "**recursive**" (Turing 1936, Church 1941)

![P, EXP, and R](static/img/P-EXP-R.svg)

---
## Examples
+ Does a weighted graph have a **net-negative cycle**?
  + In *P*: e.g., *Bellman-Ford* \`O(|V||E|) = O(n^2)\`
+ Given a **chess** board configuration (n x n), can White **win**?
  + In *EXP* (exhaustive search) but **not** in *P*
+ Given a **Tetris** board + seq of pieces, can you **survive**?
  + In *EXP* but not **known** whether in *P*
+ Given a computer **program**, does it ever **halt**?
  + [Uncomputable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem)! (&notin; *R*)
  + **Cannot** solve in *finite* time for **all** programs, for **all** inputs

---
## Halting problem
+ Assume *Halt(P, s)* solves the **halting problem**:
  + Input two strings: a **program** *P* and an **input** *s* to *P*
  + Output: *TRUE* iff *P(s)* ever **halts**
+ Now, consider the following **program**:

```
def Koan( X ):
  if Halt( X, X ):
    loop forever
Koan( Koan )
```

+ Case 1: *Koan( Koan )* **halts**.
  + &rArr; *Halt( Koan, Koan )* = TRUE (by correctness of *Halt*)
  + &rArr; *Koan( Koan )* loops forever (by code of *Koan*)
+ Case 2: *Koan( Koan )* **doesn't** halt.
  + &rArr; *Halt( Koan, Koan )* = FALSE (by correctness of *Halt*)
  + &rArr; *Koan( Koan )* halts (by code of *Koan*)
+ Either case results in a **contradiction**!

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ All-pairs shortest path
  + Johnson (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ Tractability
  + Complexity classes: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + **Non-deterministic verification:** *NP*
  + **Reductions**
  + **NP-hard and NP-complete**
+ Semester review

---
## NP
+ **Certification** algorithm: instead of saying whether *s* &in; *X*,
  + Checks a proposed **proof** that *s* &in; *X*:
+ *C(s,t)* is a **certifier** for problem *X* if for every *s*:
  + *s* &in; *X* &hArr; &exist; **certificate** *t* such that *C(s,t)* = TRUE
+ **NP** (nondeterministic polynomial): set of problems *X* <br/>
  which have a **polynomial**-time **certifier**:
  + *C(s,t)* runs in polynomial time
  + Certificate *t* is of polynomial size: *|t|* &in; O(*|s|^c*)
+ **Nondeterministic** Turing machine:
  + Can make lucky **guesses** of *t* and **check** in polynomial time
  + Will find a **valid** *t* (if exists) in polynomial num of guesses
+ **P** &sube; **NP** &sube; **EXP**
  + For any **NP** problem, can try every string *t* of |t| &lt; n

---
## Reductions

---
## NP-hard and NP-complete

![NP complete](static/img/NP-complete.svg)

---
## P =? NP

---
## For further reading
+ [MIT 6.890: Fun with Hardness Proofs](http://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.890/fall14/)

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ All-pairs shortest path
  + Johnson (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ Tractability
  + Complexity classes: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + Non-deterministic verification: *NP*
  + Reductions
  + NP-hard and NP-complete
+ **Semester review**

---
## Semester overview
+ **Complexity**: *&Theta; O &Omega; o &omega;*, recurrence, induction
  <span class="ref">(ch1-5)</span>
+ **Sorting**  <span class="ref">(ch4-8)</span>
  + Comparison sorts: *insert*, *merge*, *heap*, *quick*
  + Linear sorts: *counting*, *radix*, *bucket*
+ **Data Structures**  <span class="ref">(ch10-12, 18)</span>
  + *Hash* tables, linked *lists*, *BST*s, *B-trees*
+ **Divide and Conquer**  <span class="ref">(ch15-16)</span>
  + Dynamic prog: *rod* cut, *matrix*-chain, *LCS*, opt *BST*
  + Greedy: *act* sel, list *merge*, *Huffman*, frac *knapsack*
+ **Graph Algorithms**  <span class="ref">(ch22-25)</span>
  + Spanning trees: *Kruskal*, *Prim*
  + Single-source shortest paths: *Bellman-Ford*, *Dijkstra*
  + All-pairs shortest paths: *Floyd-Warshall*, *Johnson*

---
## Lecture 1: ch1-3
+ **Insertion** sort and its **analysis**
+ Discrete **math** review
  + **Logic** and proofs
  + Monotonicity, limits, iterated functions
  + **Fibonacci** sequence and golden ratio
  + Factorials and **Stirling's** approximation
+ **Asymptotic** notation: &Theta;, O, &Omega;, o, &omega;
  + **Proving** asymptotic bounds

---
## Lecture 2: ch4-5
+ **Divide and conquer** *(ch4)*
  + **Merge** sort and its **analysis**
  + Recursion trees + proof by **induction**
  + Maximum **subarray**
  + Matrix multiply vs **Strassen**'s method
  + **Master method** of solving recurrences
+ **Probabilistic Analysis** *(ch5)*
  + **Hiring** problem and analysis
  + **Randomised** algorithms and PRNGs

---
## Lecture 3: ch6-7
+ **Heapsort** *(ch6)* :
  + Trees, binary **heaps**, **max-heap** property
  + **Heapify()** function on a node
  + **Heapsort**: build a max-heap, use it for sorting
  + **Priority queue** using max-heap: operations, complexity
+ **Quicksort** *(ch7)* :
  + Regular quicksort with **fixed** (Lomuto) partitioning
  + **Randomised** pivot
  + Analysis of randomised pivot: **expected** time
+ **Vegas**-style vs **Monte-Carlo** style probabilistic algo
  + Monte-Carlo **matrix multiply** checking

---
## Lecture 4: ch8,11
+ **Linear**-time sorts *(ch8)* (**assumptions!**)
  + **Decision-tree** model, why comparison sorts are *&Omega;(n lg n)*
  + **Counting** sort: census + move: *&Theta;(n+k)*, **stability**
  + **Radix** sort (with *r* -bit digits): *&Theta;(d(n+k))*
  + **Bucket** sort: *&Theta;(n)* **expected** time
+ **Hash** tables *(ch11)*:
  + Hash **function**, hash **collisions**, **chaining**
  + **Load factor** *&alpha;* = *n*/*num\_buckets*
  + **Search** in *&Theta;(1+&alpha;)*
  + **Hashes**: div, mul, universal hashing
  + **Open addressing**: linear, quad, double-hash

---
## Lecture 5-6: ch10,12,18
+ **Linked lists** *(ch10)*:
  + Singly/**doubly**-linked, **circular**
+ **Stacks** and **queues** *(ch10)*:
  + Operations, implementation with linked-lists
+ **Trees** and Binary search trees (**BST**) *(ch12)*:
  + Tree **traversals**: inorder, preorder, postorder
  + **Search**, **Min**/max and **successor**/pred
  + **Insert** and **delete**
  + **Randomised** BST
+ **Skip lists**: implementation, complexity
+ **B-Trees** *(ch18)*
  + **Search** / **insert** / **delete** in \`O(t log\_t n)\`

---
## Lecture 8: ch15
+ **Dynamic programming**
  + **Rod-cutting** problem
  + Proving optimal **substructure**
  + Recursive, top-down, **bottom-up** solutions
+ **Fibonacci** sequence
+ **Matrix-chain** multiplication
+ Longest common **subsequence**
+ Shortest unweighted **path**
+ Optimal **binary search tree**

---
## Lecture 9: ch16
+ **Greedy** algorithms
  + Proving optimal *substructure*
  + Proving *greedy property*
+ **Activity selection** problem
+ **List merging** problem
+ **Huffman** coding
+ **Knapsack** problem: *fractional* and *0-1*
+ Optimal offline **caching**

---
## Lecture 10: ch22
+ **Graph** representation:
  + Edge list, *adjacency list*, adjacency matrix
+ **Breadth-first** graph traversal
+ **Depth-first** graph traversal
  + **Parenthesis** structure
  + Edge **classification**
  + Topological **sort**
  + Finding **strongly-connected** components

---
## Lecture 11-12: ch23-25
+ **Minimum spanning tree** (*MST*)
  + **Kruskal** (*disjoint-set forest*): \`O(|E| log |E|)\`
  + **Prim** (*priority queue*): \`O(|V| log |V| + |E|)\`
+ **Single-source** shortest paths
  + **Bellman-Ford**: \`O(|V| |E|)\`
  + Special case for **DAG** (*no cycles*)
  + **Dijkstra** (*weights &ge; 0*): \`O(|V| log |V| + |E|)\`
+ **All-pairs** shortest paths
  + **Dynamic** programming by *path length*: \`O(|V|^4)\`
  + **Exponential** speedup: \`O(|V|^3 log |V|)\`
  + **Floyd-Warshall** (dyn prog by *vertex subset*): \`O(|V|^3)\`
  + **Johnson** (iterative *Dijkstra*): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V||E|)\`

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ **All-pairs** shortest path
  + *Johnson* (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ **Tractability**
  + Complexity **classes**: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + **Non-deterministic** verification: *NP*
  + **Reductions**
  + NP-**hard** and NP-**complete**
+ Semester **review**

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" class="empty" -->

Commit message:

more on examples of NP

slides/slides.md, after:

<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
# CMPT231
## Lecture 13: ch34
### Tractability, Semester Review

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## [1 Corinthians 1:18-21](http://www.esvbible.org/1%20Corinthians+1/) <span class="ref">(ESV)</span>
For the word of the **cross**
is **folly** to those who are perishing, <br/>
but to us who are being saved it is the **power** of God.

<span class="ref">19</span>
For it is written,
“I will destroy the **wisdom** of the wise, <br/>
and the **discernment** of the discerning I will thwart.”

<span class="ref">20</span>
Where is the one who is **wise**?
Where is the **scribe**? <br/>
Where is the **debater** of this age? <br/>
Has not God made **foolish** the wisdom of the world?
 
>>>
+ foolishness of God wiser than man's wisdom
+ boast in the Lord alone

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ **All-pairs** shortest path
  + *Johnson* (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ **Tractability**
  + Complexity **classes**: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + **Non-deterministic** verification: *NP*
  + **Reductions**
  + NP-**hard** and NP-**complete**
+ Semester **review**

---
## All-pairs shortest path
+ **Bellman-Ford** on each vertex: \`O(|V|^4)\`
+ Dyn prog by **path length**: \`O(|V|^3 log |V|)\`
+ **Floyd-Warshall** (by *subset* of *V*): \`O(|V|^3)\`
+ **Johnson** (*Dijkstra* on each vertex): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
  + **Reweight** edges for positive weights

---
## Johnson's reweighting
+ Johnson's trick: Add a **new** vertex *s*
  + Add **zero-weight** edges from *s* to all vertices:
    + *V'* = *V* &cup; {*s*},
    + *E'* = *E* &cup; {*(s,v)*: *v* &in; *V*}, and
      *w(s,v)* = 0 &forall; *v*
  + **Compute** *&delta;(s,v)* &forall; *v* (e.g., with Bellman-Ford)
  + **Reweight** edges using *h(v)* = *&delta;(s,v)*

![Johnson reweight, Fig-25-6(ab)](static/img/Fig-25-6ab.png)

---
## Johnson's reweighting
+ Why does this eliminate **negative weights**?
  + **Triangle inequality**: *&delta;(s,v)* &le; *&delta;(s,u)* + *w(u,v)*
  + Substitute **defn** of *h*: *h(v)* &le; *h(u)* + *w(u,v)*
  + Apply **reweighting**: *w'(u,v)* = *w(u,v)* + *h(u)* - *h(v)* &ge; 0

![Johnson reweight, Fig-25-6(ab)](static/img/Fig-25-6ab.png)

---
## Johnson all-pairs
```
def Johnson( G, w ):
  create G' = (V', E') with new vertex s
  BellmanFord( G', w, s )                   # find dlt[ s, v ]: O(VE)
    if returned FALSE, quit                 # net-neg cycle
  w'[ u, v ] = w[ u, v ] + dlt[ s, u ] - dlt( s, v ]
  for u in V:
    Dijkstra( G, w', u )                    # find dlt'[ u, v ]: O(VlgV + E)
    for v in V:
      d[ u, v ] = dlt'[ u, v ] - dlt[ s, u ] + dlt[ s, v ]
  return d
```

+ Innermost loop **converts** back to original weighting
+ **Complexity**: \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V||E|)\`

---
## All-pairs shortest path: summary
+ **Negative** edges allowed (but not net-negative *cycles*)
+ **Floyd-Warshall**: \`O(|V|^3)\`
  + Dyn prog by **subset** of vertices for intermediate nodes
+ **Johnson**: \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V||E|)\`
  + **Bellman Ford** from new source *s*
  + **Reweight**: *h(v)* = *&delta;(s,v)*
    and *w'(u,v)* = *w(u,v)* + *h(u)* - *h(v)*
  + Run **Dijkstra** from each vertex

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ All-pairs shortest path
  + Johnson (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ **Tractability**
  + **Complexity classes:** *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + Non-deterministic verification: *NP*
  + Reductions
  + NP-hard and NP-complete
+ Semester review

---
## Decision problems
+ Phrase problem as yes/no **decision**:
  + **Input**: a string *s* (e.g., encoded in binary)
  + **Problem**: a set of strings *X*
  + **Algorithm** *A* returns boolean: \`A(s) = true iff s in X\`
+ **Complexity** of *A* in terms of **length** *n* of *s*
+ e.g., given graph *(V, E, w)*, is there a **path** of weight &le; 4
  between nodes *u* and *v*?
  + **Input** *s* includes entire *graph* spec, "*4*", *u*, and *v*
  + Floyd-Warshall: \`O(|V|^3) = O(n^3)\`
+ e.g., given an integer *j*, is it **prime**?
  + Writing *j* out, **length** of input is \`n=log j\`
  + Lenstra-Pomerance [AKS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AKS_primality_test)
    algorithm (2011): \`O(n^6 log^k n)\`
    + roughly **polynomial** in length of input

---
## Turing machine model
+ General model of **computation**
+ Infinite **tape** using finite **symbol** set (plus *blank*)
+ Machine has a **head** that can *read*, *write*, and *move* left/right
+ Machine has a **state space** and **transitions**:
  + Instructions for when to **change** internal states
  + **Program** code (finite)

<div class="imgbox"><div>
![Alan Turing](static/img/alan-turing.jpg)
</div><div>
![Turing machine](static/img/turing-machine-2.png)
</div></div>

---
## Complexity classes
+ *P*: decision problems for which **polynomial-time** algorithms exist
  + **Most** of the algorithms in this course! \`O(n^c)\`
+ *EXP*: problems solvable in **exponential** time: \`O(2^(n^c))\`
+ *R*: problems solvable in **finite** time
  + R = "**recursive**" (Turing 1936, Church 1941)

![P, EXP, and R](static/img/P-EXP-R.svg)

---
## Examples
+ Does a weighted graph have a **net-negative cycle**?
  + In *P*: e.g., *Bellman-Ford* \`O(|V||E|) = O(n^2)\`
+ Given a **chess** board configuration (n x n), can White **win**?
  + In *EXP* (exhaustive search) but **not** in *P*
+ Given a **Tetris** board + seq of pieces, can you **survive**?
  + In *EXP* but not **known** whether in *P*
+ Given a computer **program**, does it ever **halt**?
  + [Uncomputable](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Halting_problem)! (&notin; *R*)
  + **Cannot** solve in *finite* time for **all** programs, for **all** inputs

---
## Halting problem
+ Assume *Halt(P, s)* solves the **halting problem**:
  + Input two strings: a **program** *P* and an **input** *s* to *P*
  + Output: *TRUE* iff *P(s)* ever **halts**
+ Now, consider the following **program**:

```
def Koan( X ):
  if Halt( X, X ):
    loop forever
Koan( Koan )
```

+ Case 1: *Koan( Koan )* **halts**.
  + &rArr; *Halt( Koan, Koan )* = TRUE (by correctness of *Halt*)
  + &rArr; *Koan( Koan )* loops forever (by code of *Koan*)
+ Case 2: *Koan( Koan )* **doesn't** halt.
  + &rArr; *Halt( Koan, Koan )* = FALSE (by correctness of *Halt*)
  + &rArr; *Koan( Koan )* halts (by code of *Koan*)
+ Either case results in a **contradiction**!

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ All-pairs shortest path
  + Johnson (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ Tractability
  + Complexity classes: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + **Non-deterministic verification:** *NP*
  + **Reductions**
  + **NP-hard and NP-complete**
+ Semester review

---
## NP
+ **Certification** algorithm: instead of saying whether *s* &in; *X*,
  + Checks a proposed **proof** that *s* &in; *X*:
+ *C(s,t)* is a **certifier** for problem *X* if for every *s*:
  + *s* &in; *X* &hArr; &exist; **certificate** *t* such that *C(s,t)* = TRUE
+ **NP** (nondeterministic polynomial): set of problems *X* <br/>
  which have a **polynomial**-time **certifier**:
  + *C(s,t)* runs in polynomial time
  + Certificate *t* is of polynomial size: *|t|* &in; O(*|s|^c*)
+ **Nondeterministic** Turing machine:
  + Can make lucky **guesses** of *t* and **check** in polynomial time
  + Will find a **valid** *t* (if exists) in polynomial num of guesses

---
## Examples of NP
+ e.g., **Tetris** &in; *NP*:
  + Given sequence of moves, can easily **check** if survive
  + **Rules** are simple; **strategy** is hard
+ Most **games**: *checkers*, *Minesweeper*, *Sudoku*, etc.
+ **Travelling salesman** problem (*TSP*):
  + **Shortest** path visiting **every** vertex in weighted graph
  + **Decision** version: is min weight &le; *x*?
+ **Satisfiability** (*3-SAT*):
  + Boolean formula in **conjunctive normal form** (*CNF*):
    + \`(x\_1 or x\_2 or x\_3) and (x\_4 or x\_5 or x\_6) and ...\`
    + Each **clause** is an **OR** of up to *3* Boolean variables
    + CNF **formula** is an **AND** of all clauses
  + Is there an **input** of \`{x\_i}\` that makes the formula *TRUE*?
  + Easy to **check** a given input, but hard to **find**

---
## P vs NP
+ **P** &sube; **NP** &sube; **EXP**
  + For any *P* problem, can **solve** &rArr; can find **certificate** *t*
  + For any *NP* problem, can try **every string** *t* with *|t| &lt; n*
+ Million-dollar question (Clay prize): **P =? NP**
  + Is it easier to **check** a proof than **construct** one?
  + Can't "*engineer luck*"

---
## Reductions

---
## NP-hard and NP-complete

![NP complete](static/img/NP-complete.svg)

---
## P =? NP

---
## For further reading
+ [MIT 6.890: Fun with Hardness Proofs](http://courses.csail.mit.edu/6.890/fall14/)

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ All-pairs shortest path
  + Johnson (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ Tractability
  + Complexity classes: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + Non-deterministic verification: *NP*
  + Reductions
  + NP-hard and NP-complete
+ **Semester review**

---
## Semester overview
+ **Complexity**: *&Theta; O &Omega; o &omega;*, recurrence, induction
  <span class="ref">(ch1-5)</span>
+ **Sorting**  <span class="ref">(ch4-8)</span>
  + Comparison sorts: *insert*, *merge*, *heap*, *quick*
  + Linear sorts: *counting*, *radix*, *bucket*
+ **Data Structures**  <span class="ref">(ch10-12, 18)</span>
  + *Hash* tables, linked *lists*, *BST*s, *B-trees*
+ **Divide and Conquer**  <span class="ref">(ch15-16)</span>
  + Dynamic prog: *rod* cut, *matrix*-chain, *LCS*, opt *BST*
  + Greedy: *act* sel, list *merge*, *Huffman*, frac *knapsack*
+ **Graph Algorithms**  <span class="ref">(ch22-25)</span>
  + Spanning trees: *Kruskal*, *Prim*
  + Single-source shortest paths: *Bellman-Ford*, *Dijkstra*
  + All-pairs shortest paths: *Floyd-Warshall*, *Johnson*

---
## Lecture 1: ch1-3
+ **Insertion** sort and its **analysis**
+ Discrete **math** review
  + **Logic** and proofs
  + Monotonicity, limits, iterated functions
  + **Fibonacci** sequence and golden ratio
  + Factorials and **Stirling's** approximation
+ **Asymptotic** notation: &Theta;, O, &Omega;, o, &omega;
  + **Proving** asymptotic bounds

---
## Lecture 2: ch4-5
+ **Divide and conquer** *(ch4)*
  + **Merge** sort and its **analysis**
  + Recursion trees + proof by **induction**
  + Maximum **subarray**
  + Matrix multiply vs **Strassen**'s method
  + **Master method** of solving recurrences
+ **Probabilistic Analysis** *(ch5)*
  + **Hiring** problem and analysis
  + **Randomised** algorithms and PRNGs

---
## Lecture 3: ch6-7
+ **Heapsort** *(ch6)* :
  + Trees, binary **heaps**, **max-heap** property
  + **Heapify()** function on a node
  + **Heapsort**: build a max-heap, use it for sorting
  + **Priority queue** using max-heap: operations, complexity
+ **Quicksort** *(ch7)* :
  + Regular quicksort with **fixed** (Lomuto) partitioning
  + **Randomised** pivot
  + Analysis of randomised pivot: **expected** time
+ **Vegas**-style vs **Monte-Carlo** style probabilistic algo
  + Monte-Carlo **matrix multiply** checking

---
## Lecture 4: ch8,11
+ **Linear**-time sorts *(ch8)* (**assumptions!**)
  + **Decision-tree** model, why comparison sorts are *&Omega;(n lg n)*
  + **Counting** sort: census + move: *&Theta;(n+k)*, **stability**
  + **Radix** sort (with *r* -bit digits): *&Theta;(d(n+k))*
  + **Bucket** sort: *&Theta;(n)* **expected** time
+ **Hash** tables *(ch11)*:
  + Hash **function**, hash **collisions**, **chaining**
  + **Load factor** *&alpha;* = *n*/*num\_buckets*
  + **Search** in *&Theta;(1+&alpha;)*
  + **Hashes**: div, mul, universal hashing
  + **Open addressing**: linear, quad, double-hash

---
## Lecture 5-6: ch10,12,18
+ **Linked lists** *(ch10)*:
  + Singly/**doubly**-linked, **circular**
+ **Stacks** and **queues** *(ch10)*:
  + Operations, implementation with linked-lists
+ **Trees** and Binary search trees (**BST**) *(ch12)*:
  + Tree **traversals**: inorder, preorder, postorder
  + **Search**, **Min**/max and **successor**/pred
  + **Insert** and **delete**
  + **Randomised** BST
+ **Skip lists**: implementation, complexity
+ **B-Trees** *(ch18)*
  + **Search** / **insert** / **delete** in \`O(t log\_t n)\`

---
## Lecture 8: ch15
+ **Dynamic programming**
  + **Rod-cutting** problem
  + Proving optimal **substructure**
  + Recursive, top-down, **bottom-up** solutions
+ **Fibonacci** sequence
+ **Matrix-chain** multiplication
+ Longest common **subsequence**
+ Shortest unweighted **path**
+ Optimal **binary search tree**

---
## Lecture 9: ch16
+ **Greedy** algorithms
  + Proving optimal *substructure*
  + Proving *greedy property*
+ **Activity selection** problem
+ **List merging** problem
+ **Huffman** coding
+ **Knapsack** problem: *fractional* and *0-1*
+ Optimal offline **caching**

---
## Lecture 10: ch22
+ **Graph** representation:
  + Edge list, *adjacency list*, adjacency matrix
+ **Breadth-first** graph traversal
+ **Depth-first** graph traversal
  + **Parenthesis** structure
  + Edge **classification**
  + Topological **sort**
  + Finding **strongly-connected** components

---
## Lecture 11-12: ch23-25
+ **Minimum spanning tree** (*MST*)
  + **Kruskal** (*disjoint-set forest*): \`O(|E| log |E|)\`
  + **Prim** (*priority queue*): \`O(|V| log |V| + |E|)\`
+ **Single-source** shortest paths
  + **Bellman-Ford**: \`O(|V| |E|)\`
  + Special case for **DAG** (*no cycles*)
  + **Dijkstra** (*weights &ge; 0*): \`O(|V| log |V| + |E|)\`
+ **All-pairs** shortest paths
  + **Dynamic** programming by *path length*: \`O(|V|^4)\`
  + **Exponential** speedup: \`O(|V|^3 log |V|)\`
  + **Floyd-Warshall** (dyn prog by *vertex subset*): \`O(|V|^3)\`
  + **Johnson** (iterative *Dijkstra*): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V||E|)\`

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" -->
## Outline for today
+ **All-pairs** shortest path
  + *Johnson* (reweighted Dijkstra): \`O(|V|^2 log |V| + |V| |E|)\`
+ **Tractability**
  + Complexity **classes**: *P*, *EXP*, *R*
  + **Non-deterministic** verification: *NP*
  + **Reductions**
  + NP-**hard** and NP-**complete**
+ Semester **review**

---
<!-- .slide: data-background-image="static/bg/unsplash-Jztmx9yqjBw-stars.jpg" class="empty" -->
